Our scripture for this session is found in Romans chapter seven and verse 24, Romans seven and verse 24 Bible says, Oh, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
And it's the brain on drugs.
How the devil changed the mind.
Let's pray.
Father God, we thank you for this opportunity to study a word and Lord, as we get into this topic now, Lord, we are asking for Holy spirit.
presence again, Lord, work on our hearts, work on our minds and make us instruments to help free others through your power.
This is our prayer in Jesus' name.
Amen.
All right.
So one of my, the, my favorite verses when I'm, when you're thinking about addiction is actually found in Romans chapter seven, Romans chapter seven.
And if you start at verse 14, it says, for we know that the law is spiritual,
but I am carnal sold on the sin."
And this is Paul talking about the flesh.
And he says, for that which I do, I allow not.
For what I would, that do I not.
But what I hate, that do I. Paul here is basically describing addiction.
We're just talking about it on the break, right?
The person doesn't really want to do it, but they're stuck doing it.
The thing I actually hate doing, that's what I'm doing.
He says, verse 16 of Romans 7,
If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is good.
Now that it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.
Paul says, for I know that in me that is in my flesh, dwells no good thing.
For to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not.
Then he says, for the good that I would, I do not.
But the evil which I would not, that's what I do.
Now if I do that I would not,
It is no more either do it, but sin that dwells in me."
And Paul says, I find then a law that when I would do good, evil is present with me.
When I would do good, evil is present with me.
And so yes, even in addiction, people begin to have that desire to escape addiction.
But because of the way addiction is set up, you want to do right, but evil keeps pulling you in.
Now,
What I want to clarify statements when I ask me about this, I am not saying that it, you know, when someone is addicted, they can't be justified.
Justification says you confess your sin.
God forgives you.
You may stumble around addiction for a while as God leads you out.
That's the process of sanctification.
What I am saying is when you stay in a state of intoxication, it is impossible to reason.
This is why we are admonished in scripture to be
sober so many times.
So we're going to look at how these, uh, how this whole thing really works.
Desire of ages page three 41.
L. Y says through his specious temptation, Satan leads men to worse and worse evils till utter depravity and ruin are the results.
The only safeguard against his power is found in the presence of Jesus.
His Spirit will develop in man all that will ennoble the character and dignify the nature.
It will build man up for the glory of God in body and soul and spirit.
He has called for us to the obtaining of the glory character of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He has called us to be conformed to the image of His Son.
We are called to be like Christ and that's difficult to do when we have addiction, right?
So how does this happen?
So let's step back from, I talked about the United States and the drug runners.
And when we moved from Connecticut to Miami in 10th grade, the realtor took us back ways into a neighborhood every time the realtor showed my mother the house.
And we didn't know we wound up buying a house just a couple blocks from one of the major crack neighborhoods in Miami.
So helicopters, gunshots, something y'all know what I'm talking about.
And what I learned is
The addiction is powerful.
It doesn't just take down a person.
It takes down whole families.
It takes down whole communities, right?
Addiction is powerful stuff, but it's not just the science of this.
It's not just the neurochemicals.
There is a spiritual component.
There is a spiritual war going on for your soul.
And a lot of times we think of the great controversy.
We think about angels and demons fighting out there.
We think about the war in heaven.
Let me tell you, the greatest battleground in the great controversy is your mind.
That's what a real fight is going on.
It's in you.
That's the real big fight.
So let's look at addiction.
Let's go further.
Ella White, counsel for the church.
She says,
Satan gathered the fallen angels together to devise some way of doing the most possible evil to the human family.
One proposition after another was made till finally Satan himself thought of a plan.
He would take the fruit of the vine, also wheat and other things given by God as food and would convert them into poisons which would ruin man's physical, mental and moral powers and so overcome the senses that Satan should have full control.
How did this happen?
When man fell, decay became possible.
With decay, the creation of toxins, poisons became possible.
In the perfect world before Adam and Eve sinned, that was probably not possible.
You can argue that theologically, but whatever, either man wouldn't have been affected by it or it wouldn't have been produced.
We know that this is the case because even righteous Noah, after he comes off of the ark, makes a vineyard,
The atmosphere had changed.
Some argue maybe he didn't realize the wine would, the grape juice would ferment.
I don't know, maybe give him, oh no, a pass.
I'm not sure.
But Noah gets drunk.
Sagan understood that he could take what was designed to nourish man and use it to poison man.
That's literally what he figured out.
And he understood how the brain worked and he started to hijack our reward system under the influence of liquor.
Men would be led to commit crimes of all kinds.
Through perverted appetite, the world would be made corrupt.
By leading men to drink alcohol, Satan would cause them to descend lower and lower in the scale.
Satan is taking the world captive through the use of liquor and tobacco.
Tea and mercy.
I talk about coffee, I'm telling you.
Boy, sometimes I feel like somebody's gonna jump me nowadays when you talk about coffee.
The God-given mind, which should be kept clear, is perverted by the use of narcotics.
The brain is no longer able to distinguish correctly.
The enemy has control.
Man has sold his reason for that which makes him mad.
He has no sense of what is right.
You sell your reason.
And remember, God says, come let us reason together.
Why is this constant state of intoxication
incompatible with salvation because you can't reason.
It becomes difficult to be saved, right?
You gotta, God has to work you out of this state so that you can be in a place where you can make the decision.
Like the prodigal son in the pig pen, you can come to yourself.
I will arise and go to my father.
If he was drunk in the pig pen, he might not come to that conclusion.
So one of the, my, my favorite equations I created,
Um, stress equals demands minus resources, right?
So what does the devil do?
He gives you demands, puts pressure on you.
You're in school and you got to do well in school.
And so you study real hard all week.
Man, it feels good to go partying on a weekend with your friends.
The stress, the demand is put on you, right?
But what the devil does is he creates false resources.
I want you to understand that the devil will produce and give you false resources.
In other words, what the devil does is he gives you things that make you feel like the demand is less.
He gives you things that make you feel like the stress is better.
But I've taken care of a lot of people who are alcoholics and stuff.
I've tell you, no one ever drank a whole bottle of fit the whiskey or something and woke up the next morning and all the problems went away.
What happened the next morning when you wake up?
You wake up with all your problems and a hangover.
The devil tricks you into false resources.
And again, a major object lesson.
You have got to trust the resources of God, not the resources of the world.
When you learn to do that, something special, something powerful begins to happen.
So let's look at this.
There are six triggers of substance abuse.
I want to really talk about why people get into this.
Number one, stress and anxiety.
Right.
People are stressed out.
They need to relax.
They go home, they have a glass of wine.
And the world lied to you and said, having a glass of wine is actually good for you.
They lied to you.
The resveratrol in the wine don't come from the alcohol, it comes from the grape.
I mean, you go home and eat a bunch of grapes and get all the benefits you need without the risk from the poison that is alcohol.
We'll talk more about that.
Negative emotions, right?
You're heartbroken and you go drink this old famous reggae song, Red Red Wine.
Guy gets his heart broken, what does he want?
He gonna drink red wine.
Does that make his heart get back together?
Nope, she just don't want him even more now.
Social pressure and environments, boredom and lack of fulfillment.
Talk about purpose there.
Mental health struggles and trauma, chronic pain or medical issues.
And that one really is, I spoke to a major evangelical leader in this country.
I was on his radio program and we were talking a bit about addiction on the radio and he said to me, after we were off, he said,
He told me this, I mean, if I said his name, everybody over a certain age, everybody would know who he is.
And he said his wife went in for like hip surgery or knee surgery and they put her on Vicodin or Norco, whatever for pain.
He said his, after seven days of taking, just like I said in the last session, she was a full addict.
She was dependent on it.
They actually had to take his wife in her seventies and put her into rehab.
All started because of the pain from the procedure.
So it's not always emotional pain, physical pain because of what Jacob did as we talked about last time.
Here are the five stages of addiction, initiation.
This is you going to the party, Adventist, you never had a drink, never smoked nothing.
You go there and they're passing around joints and everybody got them red cups full of liquor and you don't want to be out of place.
And so you try it.
You don't like how it tastes.
You don't like how you breathe after you smoke that stuff in, but you've been initiated with it.
Something bad happens.
You get an argument with your parents.
You don't like what happens at church.
Your best friend, you find out your best friend is dating your boyfriend.
And so now you start to experiment because one of the things that these substances do is they change your mood.
Right.
So you feel down, you have a drink, you smoke some stuff, you feel better, you start experimenting.
Now you get to start to use it.
You're comfortable with it.
The reason the first drink you ever take
usually taste terrible is because your body recognizes alcohol as poison.
The reason the first cigarette people have usually makes them sick is because your body recognizes tobacco as poison.
You have to develop a tolerance to the negative taste of these substances because and the reason you're willing to go there is because of how it makes you feel.
So over time, what happens is you associate, don't miss this, the poisonous, horrible taste with the feeling you're going to get afterwards.
And now you begin to like the taste of the poison.
Then that goes from use to misuse and of course to full blown addiction, right?
And it's the cycle of addiction.
You got an emotional trigger here, initial emotional pain or stress, the parents divorce,
Your spouse leaves you, or I should say, your boyfriend or girlfriend leaves you.
You get the substance use, right?
To feel better.
You get the temporary relief.
Then you get the negative consequences from it.
You're hungover.
You're late for meetings.
You're not getting your schoolwork done.
You get shame or guilt because you know you shouldn't be doing what you're doing.
You get more emotional pain from the shame.
And so you've got the emotional trigger.
You start all over again.
Again, let me, I'm gonna highlight this.
One of the ways the devil leaves you in addiction
is to feed you shame.
He is the accuser of the brethren.
And he has been cast down, Revelation 12 says, who accused our brethren day and night.
And that's why the Bible says in Revelation 12, 12, we'll unto the inhabitants of the earth and of the sea.
For the devil has come down among you having great wrath because he knows he has what a short time watches.
He can no longer accuse you before God in heaven like he did Job or he did in the book of Job.
So he accuses you to you.
He's in your head playing the tape of your past.
In order to convince you you're not worthy of what Christ did for you.
Shame is one of the ways you're staying here.
I'm going to show you tomorrow there's a connection between that and even the mark of the beast.
How addiction rewires the brain, right?
So you get a substance, a cycle of dopamine intolerance.
You consume the substance.
Let's say it's a cigarette.
You get the dopamine surge.
You get short-term pleasure.
When my friends went out a little, I never smoked cigarettes.
Let me tell you something.
One of the reasons I never got into drugs and alcohol
It wasn't because I was afraid of the police.
I was afraid of my mother.
I'd rather the police take me than my mother take me, boy, because the police at least going to put you in a pen.
She might put you in a chokehold or something.
Here it is.
So short-term pleasure, you get the brain adapts.
You get tolerant.
So now that same cigarette after a while no longer gives you a buzz, you don't feel anything.
Right?
And so you had a dopamine crash.
You feel bad because you're low.
You have to smoke another cigarette.
The craving starts.
You consume the substance.
You get the dopamine surge.
Here's what happens after a while in the cycle, though.
At first, the substance actually makes you high.
It gives you a buzz.
After a while, you know what happens?
You smoke the cigarette just to feel normal.
That's when addiction has really gotten you.
You can't feel normal without it.
And then you have to smoke more and more and more and more.
So you go from a few cigarettes a day, and I saw veterans who smoke three packs of cigarettes a day.
How many cigarettes in a pack?
20.
Don't answer that quick, you know.
20, right?
So if you smoke three packs of cigarettes in a day, how many you smoke?
60 cigarettes.
I remember asking one of the best, how do you smoke?
How do you have time to smoke 60 cigarettes a day?
You know what he told me?
He said when he's in the shower, there's a cigarette on the toilet and he sticks his head out in the water, takes the drag, puts it down, put it back in the shower.
Come on out, take a drink.
He said he wakes, one of them told me he would wake up at night every so many hours to have a cigarette.
You develop, this is one of the most frightening things that happens is that you develop tolerance.
One of the most frightening things that happens is that you develop tolerance.
Here it is, effects of addiction.
All right, so here's what happens as you get addicted.
Physical health is messed up and declines.
Number two, your mental health leads to depression, anxiety, and mood problems.
Relationship strains, right?
I know so many marriages that this is the issue that ended the marriage.
It strains a parent and child, destroys their... Look at just recently, Rob Reiner, famous Hollywood dude, right?
Him and his wife, their addicted son, and he had mental health issues, but he killed the two of them.
It puts a, it puts a terrible strain on, and I mean, I could go to all the celebrities that, that's how they died.
In their addiction, someone in their family.
Go back and study what happened to Marvin Gaye, famous Motown singer.
Amy Winehouse, relationship strings, here we go.
Financial distress, eventually you eat up all your money unless you're one of those rich celebrities we talked about.
Impairs judgment and decision making.
So this is the process, so after a while you,
You're not even thinking straight anymore.
All you want is the drugs.
And when you hear about the experiments with the rats, they give the rats, rats of the opposite sex they can sleep with.
They give them food.
They give them water.
They give them cocaine.
What happens?
Many of them will die pressing the cocaine lever when everything they needed to live was in the cage with them.
It just takes over the mind.
And what ends up happening is you have a preoccupational amplification
You binge intoxication happens in the basal gland, you binge intoxication, dopamine is released, you feel good, you go through the withdrawals, the amygdala feels terrible, the emotions are here, you come back around preoccupation and anticipation and it just goes around and around and around and around and it just destroys the mind.
And you go through these cycles of abstinence relapse, abstinence relapse until eventually as you can see here, you drop down so low that the normal for you, your mood normal is so low
Without drugs, you just don't feel like you can even function.
This is where the devil wants you.
And he starts here.
Sugar and caffeine.
Don't get mad at me now.
The caffeine stuff.
People get mad.
It ain't my fault.
Here it is.
This is your brain on sugar.
This is a normal brain.
Cocaine uses brain.
Sugar uses brain.
So what I'm about to show you is how it is the devil actually gets a lot of us when we're very young.
And this is how the addiction pathway starts.
So this is sugar.
According to a recent UCLA study, sugar forms free radicals in the brain's membrane, compromising our nerve cells ability to communicate.
This causes a foggy or out of it feeling.
The study do strong connection between sugar intake and a diminishment in how well we remember instructions and process ideas.
Studies have shown links to sugar starting cycles of binge eating dopamine spikes and physical and emotional crash and then more craving and withdrawal as a result.
We have shorter tempers, lower patients, and even depressed feelings.
Sugar is often the first drug you're exposed to.
Now, there are clear links between high-fructose sugar consumption and memory and learning impairment.
Even more unsettling is the research suggesting a high-sugar consumption has long-term and more severe repercussions, such as links between sugar and Alzheimer's.
So sugar is serious.
But here's what's crazy, and I have a whole talk on this, I'm not gonna do it today.
Baby formula is where it starts.
In some baby formula, there's more sugar than in soda.
So from where little, little kids, if you don't nurse, part of the health message is that we should breastfeed nurse babies.
And one of the reasons here, they put all that sugar in this thing.
And so from a little young age, you already have this predilection
to sweets and dopamine release in the brain, right?
They do this because the formula company wants you to keep buying their formula.
Then you become a little kid.
They give you sweetened stuff here, sodas, fast food, right?
Over time, what happens?
Sugar primes the dopamine system.
We'll talk about dopamine more in a second for later addiction to other substances.
It primes the brain, making you want something that's going to make you feel better all the time.
It's just a primer.
All by itself doesn't do anything.
You may never try a drug in your life, but it primes the brain.
Then they throw in caffeine, right?
So I'll say it.
Some of our churches even have like coffee machine in the lobby.
I don't know how we got there, but here we go.
Don't get mad at me.
Get mad at the science and the spirit of prophecy.
Here we go.
Here it is.
What caffeine does, it binds a dentistry and so the brain does not slow down and rejuvenate.
Adenosine builds up in your brain all day, and that's what is a clock to tell you you're getting sleepy.
And when it gets high enough, you go to sleep.
What caffeine does is just the chemical structure is similar.
It just knocks the adenosine off the receptors, and you get all this energy.
But you feel the energy, but your brain doesn't know it's supposed to have energy.
So your brain stays where it was.
Places us in a constant state of fight or flight.
It stimulates the sympathetic nervous system.
decreases blood flow to the brain.
A lot of people don't know, I think so much clear, but you don't know you actually decreasing blood flow to the brain, right?
And it increases insulin resistance.
Now what I found is this, combining coffee and sugar is the most dangerous.
The two begin to work together now.
All right, let me, let me, let me show you the slide.
Energy drinks increases reward learning, right?
Caffeine and high sugar.
Sugar strongly activates the dopamine pathways, right?
Reinforces compulsive use patterns.
more concerning than caffeine alone.
So what happens, and here's what I've found.
And there's actually a lot of, people claim there's a lot of like a cult imagery even on these energy drinks, and maybe there's a reason for that.
When you expose yourself to that, those high doses of sugar and caffeine in some of these drinks, you really mess up the reward part of your brain.
And that is what we're starting to see.
And I've worked places where people go to Starbucks three times a day.
and get a big thing of coffee like this.
Your brain simply can't function normally after that.
And there's a spiritual, we're going to talk about Theta waves.
There's a spiritual component to having your brain affected like this that a lot of times we're not thinking about.
But it primes the brain in this way.
And as far as I'm concerned, it becomes like a gateway to other addictive things because you're going to need it.
And let me say this, when you consume these high dose of caffeine, one of the things that happens is you can't sleep.
So you fall asleep, but you don't get to the deepest levels of sleep because the half-life of caffeine is six to eight hours.
So you drink the cat, even if you drink your first thing in the morning, there's a little bit floating around in your brain.
If you don't go to the deepest levels of sleep, God actually designed us.
You don't tell you, we have a wonderful God and we are fearfully and wonderfully made that when you get into the dream stage of sleep and you dream, it is natural therapy.
Did you know that?
It is how you process
the hurt and pain and difficulty of life, your dreams are often you working through your traumas.
When you don't get deep sleep, that doesn't happen.
And you wonder why so many people live a life in a sea of trauma.
Right?
So you can see that that's one of the things.
Here's what Isaiah says.
Isaiah 552 says, wherefore do you spend money for that which is not bread?
Why are you spending so much money on this stuff?
And your labor for that which satisfies not, harken digitally unto me and eat that, which is in other words consume those things that are going to build you up.
And so what the devil does in order to get these addictions to really take off, he makes health claims with poison.
That's what he does.
He's a master at it.
I'm going to give you examples.
Look at this.
This is sugar commercials or advertisements I should say.
This is a diet hit.
Sugar just might be the willpower you need to curb your appetite.
These are real.
Can sugar curb your appetite?
What does sugar do to your appetite?
It actually increases your appetite because it creates these insulin spikes.
I mean, they had all kinds of stuff like this.
Sugar keeps your energy up and your appetite down.
Sugar can be the willpower you need to under eat.
Not true at all.
They even tried to convince you that you should be giving this sugar to your little baby.
Look at this.
Look at that baby.
Happy is all getting up, getting seven up in his cup.
You see that?
The devil wants you to think that what is bad is good and what is good is bad.
It is literally what he did to Eve
at the tree.
And he does it with all of these substances.
Here's cigarettes.
Scientific evidence of effective smoking, right?
This is, Chess Fields is best for you and, you know, of course it plays on ethnic and gender things.
You've come a long way, baby, right?
And his smoking is good for you, you know?
Lucky strike.
Here are the little babies.
Gee, mommy, you sure enjoy your Marlboro, right?
These are actual advertisements from back in the day.
And I could do a whole bunch of these.
The devil always comes out.
Now let me, let me fast forward.
That's why he was telling you a glass of wine a day is actually good for you.
That's why he was telling you, oh, that marijuana, it's medicinal.
Right?
So what the devil does, he jump in and he, he use the same lie he told Eve that if you eat the fruit, it's good for you.
He does the same thing today with all of these products.
and things that are designed to destroy your tobacco being one of them.
And I won't get too deep into tobacco, but I will say this.
It's still over 480,000 Americans die every year from smoking.
Staggering number of people, right?
About 34 million and they vape.
So vaping has changed the game because you can hyper concentrate the addictive substance in the vaping material.
And we'll talk more about that when we get to marijuana.
Here's how addiction actually happens.
So this is a good diagram right here.
So if you look on the left, God designed us so that when you do things that, that supports survival of the species and of yourself, you release a little dopamine.
So it's pleasurable.
So you bite into that apple, you, you, you know, you eat that banana, you eat the mango, mango is even better, better than that.
Right.
So you, you, you eat the fruit, you eat the food, dopamine is released.
So you can hijack that by changing the way food is made, which they have bad knowledge, salt, sugar and fat.
so that it does more dopamine release and becomes a little more addicting.
But look at what cocaine does compared to food.
Those orange balls are dopamine and they make you feel good.
So the pre-synapse is up top, post-synapse is on the bottom, the synapse is the white space in between.
The orange balls are the dopamine being released.
As the dopamine hits those receptors on the bottom, that sends the signal of euphoria.
That sends the signal of you feeling good.
But dopamine does something else, maybe more important than making you feel good.
It motivates you to do more, right?
It's a motivator.
That's the one amazing thing dopamine does.
So you see, this is what happened.
You see how cocaine releases all that dopamine?
That's why it's so addicting.
Because if there's nothing you can do that naturally will feel better than that.
And here's one of the reasons why, again, it messes up your ability to reason and mess up your ability to be saved.
Because once you get here, pleasure becomes your idol.
This feeling becomes your, this is what you ultimately begin to worship.
Feeling good from the dopamine that's released from the drug.
Here it is again.
You can see that this is a cigarette.
I'll tell you, nicotine, just a strong addicted substance like cocaine.
You can see how it's released here down here, right?
It's the dopamine of the God of habit chemical.
It increases with sex.
So if you don't ever do a chemical, then naturally the highest way you release dopamine in your brain is through sexual intimacy.
orgasm.
That's the most dopamine you're going to release.
Hence why, if you're not careful, sexual sin can become addicting.
Does that make sense now?
Right?
And you just go keep on trying more, more, more, more, more, because it becomes addicting.
Here's how powerful that is.
But if you do it God's way and you're married, you become addicted to the person you're married to.
Right?
So
Here it is.
Anything done that increases dopamine changes mood.
Anything that changes mood can become addictive.
And dopamine is what runs our reward pathway.
So you can see it here again.
All the dopamine receptors, the postsynaptic neuron, all of it here.
So when you take a drink of alcohol, what actually is happening is you take the alcohol, it is a release of dopamine.
The people get that buzz, they get that feeling good, but they turn off GABA in the brain.
GABA is the inhibiting neurotransmitter.
so that your, your demeanor begins to change.
A judgment begins to change.
The frontal lobe begins to be turned off.
And so without that gavel, you make bad decisions.
I make this joke all the time.
And I hope some of y'all are old enough to get it, but I'm going to make it anyway.
When you, when a girl goes to a bar or to a club, whatever, one of the reason the guys all want to buy you a drink is because they want you disinhibited.
They want you to make a decision inebriated.
You would never make sober.
And because women have less cytochrome P450 in general, less alcohol dehydrogenates the enzyme that breaks down alcohol, you're going to get drunk faster than a guy, all other things being the same.
I don't get me wrong, there's some women that go long ways before, you know what I mean, there's some women that can drink.
But in general, you're going to get drunk first, which means he's going to have a tactical advantage for taking advantage of you.
I say it like this, he buys you to drink because he knows when he comes into that place
He looks like Flavor Flav.
But after you have a few drinks, he started looking like Denzel Washington in his prime.
If you don't get it, if you're too young for that, I'm going to look them up.
You'll see what I mean.
All right.
So here it is.
Alcohol-related deaths.
We sat 178,000 a year in America, 488 deaths a day from excessive alcohol use in 2020, 2021.
It actually went up during the pandemic.
20 on average, 24 years of life or loss for each death, right?
And so of course all the different disease that it causes.
You can see alcohol use is high all across the spectrum.
Obviously once it's legal, people drink more.
So you get here, it's like 47%, 60%.
But you can see people, there's a lot of alcohol that is taken in.
And one of the things that happens when you do this is I call it dys dopaminergic syndrome, meaning you begin to develop
tolerance to it.
And you see alcohol impacts on dopamine levels, short-term, medium, long-term, new hedonic set point.
In other words, in order to get to feel pleasure, it takes even more of everything.
Here's why that's dangerous.
And we'll talk about it more.
I'll show you a slide on it.
Once you mess up the dopamine system, even normal, everyday pleasure is difficult to find.
So just like looking at a sunset, holding hands with your loved one,
All of it, it becomes more difficult for you to actually experience pleasure.
So what happens?
You need to be constantly stimulated.
And what did the devil do?
He invented the smartphone.
He made it so you can buy these addictive substances everywhere.
He made, you know what I'm saying?
He, he's lined it up for you to always be overstimulated.
Long-term alcohol use requires more stimulation to reach that new set point.
And that's how you become an alcoholic.
So what they say is like, well, you hear Christians, Jesus turned the water into wine.
Paul said a little wine for the stomach's sake.
What's wrong with you, Dr. Walsh?
We ain't no problem with drinking, what some denominations actually say is, you can drink, just don't get drunk.
Here's a question.
When do you actually become drunk?
At what point in the process?
Because it's a process.
We know that with just one drink, it alters your response time.
That's why they say on the highway, they say tipsy driving is drunk driving.
So they say, well, Jesus turned the water into wine.
Why can't we drink alcohol?
Well, let's look at what the Bible says.
Because to me, that's what matters most.
And here it is.
You've got to go to Proverbs chapter 23 and verse 31.
It says, look not thou upon the wine when it is red.
When it gives his color in the cup, when it moves itself aright, what is being described there?
Fermentation.
The grape juice became wine.
In the Hebrew, they didn't have this, they didn't distinguish the words as well as we do now.
Do not look at the line, when it is red, when it gives its color in the cup, when it moves over right.
When fermentation is happening, the wine darkens, and because of the chemical process, it bubbles.
literally described in his verse.
Does the Bible say don't taste it?
What does it say?
Don't look at it.
Powerful admonition.
That's what Eve said when Satan came to her.
He said, God said, we shouldn't even look at the tree.
32 at the last, it bites like a serpent and it does what?
Stings like an adder.
And then Solomon gives you all of this.
Your eyes shall behold strange women.
This means people, listen, this ain't no joke.
People you would normally never lay with, drunk you will, out of Jamaican uncle.
He's a Christian now, so I can tell his story.
And you tell me all the time you went playing dominoes and drinking all that white rum, he got super drunk and he like blocked out, he didn't remember what happened.
The next morning he woke up undressed in a foreign bedroom.
He had no idea where he was.
And he's like trying to get a terrible headache.
He said, he was trying to figure out where he is.
And he said, he turned and looked next to him.
And he turned to me as Jamaican actually looked at me and said, Ricky, it was the ugliest woman I've ever seen in my life.
He said, he gotta be bar boy.
He says, running down the street, putting on clothes, running, trying to get out of here so fast.
The Bible says, your eyes shall behold strange men or strange women.
Satan wants to just bring you down down by disinhibiting you like that.
He can take you from the sin of alcohol to sexual sin.
And now what does he do?
He layers shame upon shame.
Now you don't just have the shame that you got drunk.
You got the shame that you woke up next to someone you would normally never even look at.
A nine-heart child are perverse things.
You shout, yeah, yeah, I'll shout, same.
Yeah, thou shalt be as he that lies in the midst of the sea, or as he that lies upon the top of a mass.
They have stricken me.
They beat me, you will say, and I was not sick.
They have beaten me and I felt it not.
When shall I awake?
I will do what?
I'll seek it again.
You got beat up, busted up, slept with the wrong person.
And finally you sober up.
What do you want?
Another drink.
That's the power of addiction in the Bible.
What does the Bible say?
Do not look at it.
So let me ask you a tough question now.
If the Bible that Jesus used in his date, which include the book of Proverbs, said you shouldn't look at fermented alcohol, would Jesus then take the wine at the wedding and make it alcoholic wine?
Would Jesus literally do something that violated the Old Testament command?
Listen, there's some folk, they love their alcohol so much, it ain't gonna matter what you say.
That's fine.
But I'm gonna trust what the Bible says.
The Bible says don't look at it.
So I trust that when Jesus did what he did, he didn't do this, right?
Effects of alcohol on the brain and spirit.
Theta waves, this is it.
This supports decision making, memory and emotional regulation.
Alcohol disrupts these properties.
Theta waves are associated with coordinated activity in frontal parietal brain regions and clear states of consciousness functions
Alcohol undermines.
So even your spirituality is affected because when you drink, it disrupts the level of, we talked about alpha wave, beta wave.
So you go when you talk about TV, data waves is below that.
That's that spirit.
When you were praying and calling on the name of God, theta waves are active.
When you drink alcohol, you disrupt your ability to get into theta wave.
This is why when you go into a liquor store, it says spirits sold here because I believe when you drink alcohol,
and you begin to get drunk, when you get intoxicated, your brain's defenses against the influence of demons is what is disrupted.
So it changes you so you behave different.
Alcohol acutely reduces state of wave activity, and with chronic use, it dysregulates it.
This impairs cognition and diminishes the mental clarity needed for spiritual growth despite temporary feelings of euphoria.
It stunts your ability
to grow in Christ.
Major statement.
Let me tell you something.
We as Adventists, we get teased.
When I was growing up and I didn't drink, I was afraid of my mother.
I didn't drink.
They would tease you for not drinking.
Even as a professional medical doctor, I have been at things where they have like a lecture or you know, a CME and everybody, people start drinking and you say you don't drink.
And doctors will criticize you for not drinking.
Call you a T total or something like that, they call you.
Right?
And so when you look at it, we as Adventists have been ridiculed for this, but we had it right all along.
Don't drink alcohol.
It just gives you one obstacle to getting towards being like Christ.
More adolescents use alcohol in tobacco or marijuana.
Right?
These are underage drinking stats.
You know what I mean?
It's one third of drunk driving deaths are in 16 to 20 year olds.
Right?
There are about 10.8 million underage drinkers in the United States.
One in 16 ages binge drink, but only one in 100 parents believe his or her teen binge drinks.
So there's a disconnect between what kids are doing and what the parents think they're doing.
Right?
And so you get this increased risk of organ damage from alcohol.
We'll get into that.
And so what they told us is wine is good for you.
But here's the studies.
Half a glass of wine every day increases breast cancer risk.
In fact, the World Health Organization came out and said, no amount of alcohol is good for your health.
Wait a minute, you mean Ellen White was right all along?
You mean that this idea of abstinence from these things was right?
Here's what the article says.
This is from Miami.
Actually, one of the hospitals I trained at, the Monsanto Hospital in Miami Beach,
A recently released study by the New England Journal of Medicine concludes that cessation of alcohol beverages, beverage consumption reduces the risk of several cancers.
Here's what one of the docs there said.
Even a single glass per week is sufficient to increase the risk for several types of cancer that are not related to the liver.
That's Dr. Mike Kussner.
And then he says, he echoes the result of the recent study about alcohol and cancer, which includes beer wine and liquor.
Basically the data says there is no safe amount.
Hence the Bible says don't look at it.
The science is catching up to the Bible and the spirit of prophecy is a brain of a normal elderly person, the brain of a person with Alzheimer's disease, the brain of a person with alcoholism literally eats out the brain.
You think the devil wants, of course he does because where does the seal of God go?
Frontal lobe.
He wants to erode your frontal lobe.
He wants there to be no place to put that seal because you don't, the mark of the beast, you don't have to get it here.
Where else can you get it?
In your right hand.
He can destroy your brain and still give you the mark of the brief beast.
But if he destroys your brain, getting the seal of God becomes very challenging.
Right?
And so that's what the devil is really after.
Um, this one just on awesome.
I'll skip that one here.
There's decreasing theta waves.
It dampens the brain waves associated with decision-making, but not motor control.
So that's really what the devil is after.
And so here it is again, the theta waves.
It messes up your ability to be spiritual.
I won't stay on this.
I'll skip it and just give you this verse.
Proverbs 20 verse one.
Most of us may have memorized this for pathfinders.
Wine is a mocker.
Strong drink is raging.
And whosoever is deceived thereby is what?
Not wise.
The Bible is not encouraging you to drink.
In fact, it forbids it.
And yet the world says the opposite.
Health and living page 114, when the appetite for spiritist liquor is indulged, the man voluntarily places to his lips the draught, which the base is below the level of the brute, him who was made in the image of God, reason is paralyzed, the intellect is benumbed, the animal passions are excited, and then follow crimes of the most debasing character.
Look at what she says.
The law authorizes the sale of liquor and then has to build prisons for the victims.
For nine-tenths of those who are taken to prison are those who have learned to drink.
Powerful stuff.
Is Ellen White right?
Bam, look at this.
New data.
80% of crime that leads to incarceration involve drugs or alcohol.
80%.
And I'm telling you, I used to be the medical director for the jails for Orange County, California.
And I would sometimes have to do intake late at night in the jail.
And I'm telling you, you just shocked.
the number of people who come in because they were drunk or high, got into a car accident, whatever, you know, some driving related thing or committed some heinous crime, as we'll talk about.
95% of incarcerated addicts will return to substance abuse.
So when you go to prison with a drug problem or an alcohol problem, you don't get rehabilitated in prison.
You return to it.
And then what the devil did was brilliant.
He then added marijuana and he has worked hard with marijuana.
I mean, he has worked hard with this one.
Everyone believes it's harmless.
I remember I was at one of the high schools in south central LA, you know, south of Los Angeles and one of the neighborhoods down there.
And we were there doing something.
And I was talking about a drug addiction years ago.
And I said, and I talked about weed.
And I said, you know, marijuana is not good for you or whatever I said.
And a boy looked just like Snoop, two boys stood up and he said, he said, um, marijuana is good for you.
I said, really?
I said, why?
He said, it's natural.
I said poison ivy is natural.
Will you smoke that too?
And what the devil has done to make you think it's medicinal, it's natural, it's good for you, but what the studies say is actually very, very different.
Wall Street Journal, why you aren't hearing, what you aren't hearing about marijuana's health effects.
The Wall Street Journal had another one.
New York is calling, is coming full circle on marijuana.
They legalized it recreationally and already New York is saying maybe we made a mistake because they, you know,
Here's what they did they took it from the guy the kids on the corner.
They said we're gonna We're gonna protect all these young black and brown young men who are getting incarcerated for this and we're gonna legalize it on Social justice.
We're gonna fix it for them.
So they switched and guess what they did they took it out of their hands and put it into the hands of very wealthy Big corporations not even far my big corporations then the dispensary start popping up.
It's funny.
I lived in Connecticut
Politically pretty liberal, so most of the people in my neighborhood were okay with marijuana being legalized until, and they voted for it to be legalized, or they told their people to vote for it to be legalized, until they said, okay, now somebody wants to put a dispensary in our town.
Then all of a sudden nobody wants the dispensary in our town.
It's an affluent suburb.
So where does the dispensary wind up?
In the very neighborhood you were trying to protect in the beginning.
You see the hypocrisy?
And now the money is just going up into these big corporations.
And here's what happens once you legalize that you could decriminalize marijuana and not legalize marijuana and you would assault.
Maybe you would have solved the problem a better way.
But once you legalize it, now you got big corporations competing to make the most potent weed.
Good.
Like a drug dealer on the corner.
Every company wants to be able to say, I got the good stuff.
Not change everything about marijuana.
And you're going to see.
Maryland is more dangerous than you think.
It does all these bad things.
I made a main thing is memory related.
I'll come back to that.
More teens who use marijuana are suffering from psychosis.
I've seen this diagnosed it had to treat it.
It's serious chronic marijuana use and higher dosages of THC tetrahydrocannibinoid are found to correlate to greater incidents of psychosis and what else?
Schizophrenia.
I have seen young men smoke a single joint and blow their mind.
Like literally going to a psychotic fit and never, I mean, and all the time, I never saw them come out of it.
Right now, obviously they lace it with stuff.
It may not just be the weed, but that's the danger.
And here's what they did to marijuana.
Look at this.
This is the THC content since the 1970s.
Now way back here to people smoking weed,
on TV where people, you know, like popularly were Bob Marley, Bob Dylan, these types of dudes.
Look how weak their weed was.
But Satan is smart, you know.
He introduced it here.
Everybody likes it so that he could get you here one day.
And now it ain't just a few people smoking it like in the 70s percentage wise.
It is ubiquitous.
It's legal.
You can walk into a dispensary in 28 states, I think it is, or 24 states, 24 states by recreational marijuana.
Right?
So they've made the weed more potent.
Here it is.
In addition to minor side effects, such as short-term memory loss, recent studies have linked marijuana to adverse health outcomes involving the lungs, heart, brain, and gonads.
Yes?
It messes with reproduction and fertility.
Heavy marijuana consumption seems to increase the risk of clogged arteries and heart failure, may impact male fertility.
Smoking weed likewise can lead to chronic bronchitis,
And cannabis plants hyperaccumulate metal pollutants.
This is what a lot of people don't know.
You're not just getting THC and getting high.
You're getting heavy metals in your system, right?
So let me show you that.
Studies suggest they have heavy we use, exacerbates or may trigger schizophrenia, psychosis, depression.
There's one disease I didn't put on there.
Let me just mention it.
It's called cannabis-induced hyperemesis syndrome.
Anybody ever heard of that?
You smoke weed and it's so potent that people can't stop throwing up.
I had a girl come in when I was working in California and she was just retching.
We gave her a Zofran, everything.
We gave her all kinds of anti-imetics.
Nothing worked.
It's a powerful thing that you can basically dehydrate right in front of you.
You got to put an IV in and try and get them to get through it.
Here's what the British Medical Journal said.
From a safety viewpoint, young people should definitely stay away from marijuana.
Why?
Because you get this stuff.
It isn't just the THC.
It's lead.
You know what we did to gasoline in 1970s?
We made it unleaded.
Some of y'all are too young to realize this, but that's why it says unleaded when you go get your gas because there used to be lead in the gas and lead messes up the brains of children.
So they took the lead out.
But guess what?
Now you're getting lead in weed, mercury, cadmium and arsenic, marijuana,
It's like fish.
The same reason eating fish can be dangerous because all of these pollutants, including things like mercury, hyperaccumulate.
As one fish eats the other fish, it comes up, bioaccumulates, you eat the fish, you get all that mercury.
Weed does the same thing.
It takes all these heavy metals out of the soil and then when you take it in, you get all of that.
So lead is neurotoxic, impairs cognition, impulse control.
Look at that.
The lead does that and mood.
Cadmium accumulates in the brain, kidneys, lungs linked to fatigue, anxiety, and cognitive decline.
Mercury damages the nerves and dopamine signal.
You start to see and realize Satan as you set up arsenic interferes with energy metabolism and brain function.
So the devil get you and now you're smoking weed, you're getting high.
You don't realize metal is going into you and destroying your brain and parts of your brain like the dopamine signaling, the mood control, impulse control, destroying your brain from the inside out.
far more dangerous than they're telling you.
It was a hoax.
They came with this idea and some of my talks on marijuana actually showed us studies where it says a lot of what they say that marijuana does medically, it doesn't even do.
It was all a rouge just to get people smoking weed and it worked.
And people are making millions and millions and millions of other dollars off of the demise of people who get addicted to weed.
And now they need all kinds of stuff.
I mean, it is, it's a scary thing how the devil works.
Right?
So you see THC.
It comes in.
What marijuana does differently?
Remember I showed you the orange balls on the other slide?
It does release dopamine.
So you get the high, but it does something else.
It actually messes up the postsynaptic receptors here as well.
And what does that do?
Well, now when you try any other drug, because you use marijuana regularly, cocaine is more pleasurable.
We have watched, as they've legalized marijuana,
Marijuana use has gone up.
Guess what else has gone up?
Cigarette smoking.
Because the nicotine is so good at releasing dopamine, and these receptors are messed up, so now it works as a gateway drug for you to do other drugs that stimulate dopamine.
And of course, does all of this stuff also blocks GABA, suppresses the immune system.
People don't know that.
Marijuana actually lowers your immune system, decreases memory, all these things.
A 2011 study evaluated performance on cognitive tasks among 21 heavy weed users
who had consumed alcohol.
Those who consumed just alcohol had worse cognitive function than those who only consumed THC.
Watch this.
Those who combined the two had reduced cognitive performance, had reduced cognitive performance more than those who only consumed alcohol.
When you mix them together, it's even worse.
Over the long term, combining alcohol and weed may be associated with cognitive function and change in brain structure.
Alcohol also increases the THC absorption.
I used to work with the Bloods and the Crips out in California.
When I worked in the Pasadena, I worked with the Bloods and the Crips.
The health department did, our church did, and one of the Sunday churches did in a non-profit.
And we would have these young men come in and we saw them.
In fact, the gym, our Adventist gym in Altadena and Pasadena's lawyer was good at this.
It was the only place the Bloods and the Crips played basketball together.
We had a neutral ground.
We even took some of the kids to college days at Adventist University.
That's how powerful the ministry was.
And I'll never forget, asking one of the young men one time, I said, how do you do a drive-by shooting?
Like, you know, out of curiosity, we're talking about life and things that have happened, things that he'd done.
How do you do a drive-by shooting?
How do you just go to the house?
You don't know who's inside.
Take the AK or a Uzi or something, just shoot up the house.
Like, you can get children, grandmothers, all kind of people you don't want to hit.
You know what he said?
How do you do it?
A 40 and a blunt.
You want a 40, 40 ounces of alcohol, some of y'all don't know, okay.
40 ounces of alcohol and a blunt marijuana cigarette, marijuana joint, big one.
He said once you do that, it's like you're all, everything that would stop you from doing something reckless like that is gone.
One guy even said it like, it's like a monster comes out, right?
So you mix these two up, it actually makes the whole thing even worse.
I want to give you this when it comes to the addiction.
God made the human heart so big, only he can fill it.
I learned this statement working in the Addiction Medicine Award at the Veterans Hospital in Loma Linda, California, and I heard it from the veterans and they were in a group and at the end of the group, they chant certain things, this one a chant.
And I asked, what does it mean?
He said, I had one of the veterans, combat veteran, PTSD, drug addict, recovering, and I was almost recovered because he was one of the leaders.
He said, God made the human heart so big only he can feel.
I said, what do I mean?
He said, if you try and fill the God size hole in your heart with anything but God, you'll become addicted to that thing.
The question for you today is what are you filling the God size hole in your heart with?
What are you doing it?
Romans 8 says it like this, for they that are after the flesh do mine the things of the flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.
But to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace.
Because the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God.
Neither indeed can be.
So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.
Drugs and alcohol feed the flesh.
That's what it does.
And so it makes salvation difficult.
These are overdose death.
Look at this.
It is death.
Fentanyl came on the scene and just took over.
Huge amounts of death.
You see, because sin fascinates before it assassinates.
Sin fascinates before it assassinates.
And there's a culture that pushes this.
That's Lil Wayne and Snoop.
I'll tell you about Snoop in his video.
These guys put pills.
They push mollies.
They push ecstasy.
They push all of these drugs in their music.
They rap about it.
They glorify it.
All this stuff.
And so young people follow them and you watch the carnage, but Lil Wayne, Snoop and definitely La Puffy, none of them are coming for you when you get in trouble.
None of them are coming to help.
I see kids cussing out their parent, trying to be like these people.
And when they get in trouble, it's the very same parent that has come bail them out.
If I was their mama, I'd say you better call your favorite rapper, let him come bail you out.
Now you can stay up in there and be a gangster.
I mean, the celebrities even saying, you know, they want me to go to rehab, I'm not going to rehab.
Right?
This is what happens with these celebrities.
2 Peter 2 describes it.
While they promised them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption, for of whom a man is overcome of the same as he brought in bondage.
Let me tell you something.
If this, if it overcomes you, you become a slave to this thing.
Right?
And addiction can change the brain, but the brain can heal and rewire.
So I'm gonna show you in the talk, I think maybe in the last talk today, that actually it is a miraculous thing that can happen if you decide to quit this stuff.
And we're gonna talk about porn in the next section.
You don't wanna miss that one.
I have no comment.
But here's what's gonna happen.
I'm gonna show you that even your brain can heal from that.
So addiction can change the brain.
Romans 8, 1 says, there is now therefore no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
Before we get into the next one, and we go a little deeper before we really start getting out of this stuff, I think it's real important to just remind you that, listen, sin is what Satan is selling.
Sin is where Satan wants you, but there is something more powerful than sin.
It is the blood of Jesus Christ.
And I say this all the time as well.
When you go to wash your clothes and you put your clothes in the washing machine and you throw in the tide and the Clorox bleach and you turn on the washing machine, you're not walking around the house wondering if the clothes is getting clean.
You have a really, you know, you think about it.
You wait for the buzzer to go off and you're moving to the dryer.
Some of us have more faith in Tide and Chlorox than we do in the blood of Jesus Christ.
Because you spend your whole life wondering if He's washed you clean.
And that feeds addiction.
That weakness feeds addiction.
It makes you shameful.
And that brokenness, that staying there is what causes you not to be able to move forward with God because the devil keeps telling you, you're not worthy of God.
Well, let me tell you something.
If you were the only one,
He would have come and died for you.
You are priceless in the sight of God, regardless of what you've done in your past.
The devil hates you because he cannot be reconciled to God, but you can be.
And the reason the devil wants you to go down so bad is all he has left to hurt God is that you be lost.
That's all he's got left.
He lost the war, the battle's over.
The question for you is which side will you choose to be on?
And you can't be on God's side
if you're doing the devil stuff.
So when we get in the next one, pray as we're apart these next couple hours.
Pray because we're going to deal with sexual sin and pornography.
And I have found this thing is one of the most deep, dark things because your Adventist, you can't be high and come to church.
You can't be drunk and come to church.
You come to church smelling like cigarettes.
People will look at you funny, but you can secretly watch all that pornography and come to church and nobody has any idea what you're doing.
Let's pray.
Father God, we thank you for
Your love for your blessings.
We thank you, Lord, for the blood of Jesus Christ, which still washes and still cleanses.
Lord, we just pray, especially if there are any in here who are struggling with chemical addictions to any of these things.
Father God, today the Holy Spirit would begin to work to free them.
In fact, Lord, I want to pray it like this.
We give the Holy Spirit permission for him to work on the hearts.
of all in here with bad habits or addictions, which is probably every single one of us on some level.
Lord, go in, transform us, because we want this mind in us that was also in Christ Jesus.
We want to be like Christ, not the world.
This is our prayer in Jesus' precious and holy name.
Amen and amen.
This media was produced by Audioverse for GYC, Generation Youth Christ.
If you would like to learn more about GYC, please visit gycweb.org.
Or if you would like to listen to more sermons, download the free Audioverse app or visit audioverse.org.